---
date: '2008-07-21 22:33:34'
layout: post
slug: stupid-eclipse-trick-dynamic-tracing-with-conditional-breakpoints
status: publish
title: Stupid Eclipse trick â€” Dynamic Tracing with Conditional Breakpoints
categories: [Sakai, Software]
wordpress_id: '19'
---

So I'm debugging a chain of Sakai helpers and I ask myself...

"Self, is there an easy way to use the Eclipse debugger to fake some
runtime/dynamic tracing?"

And the answer is a resounding "yes!"

If you set up conditional breakpoints at the places where you want those debug
statements and inject some great println justice, magic is made.  Eclipse is
also nice enough to allow blocks of code or expressions.  This means you can
use just the println like an expression if you don't care about the breaks, or
make a println and a return if you do.  See the screenshot for a somewhat
nonsensical example.

All of this can be yours with a single startup of Tomcat and a tail -f.  If
you're lucky enough to be hacking something in \*-tool, life is even better.
Save, mvn install sakai:deploy, relaunch your debug scenario, and keep an eye
on that terminal.  Somebody who knows what they're doing with Eclipse could
probably tell you how to even target an IDE view -- catalina.out is fine for
me, though.

...And for quick reference, you can right click on a breakpoint in the
left-hand trough and select Breakpoint properties or use the Breakpoints view.
On a Mac, Cmd-Shift-B toggles a breakpoint on a line, but getting to the
properties with the keyboard is a pain (Opt-Shift-Q, B).  In there, a
natural-feeling sequence of arrows and Opt-Enter or a right click opens the
dialog.  Getting back to the editor is easier: F12.


![Conditional Breakpoint Properties]({{BASE_PATH}}/images/2008/07/cond-break.png)


Happy hacking! -NB
