---
date: '2008-03-05 23:20:19'
layout: post
slug: first-impressions-of-office-2008
status: publish
title: First impressions of Office 2008
categories: [Miscellaneous]
wordpress_id: '7'
---

Well, I installed Office 2008 for Mac yesterday, and I'm pretty impressed, all
in all.

Entourage was the first thing I gave a romp, and it seems to be a big
improvement.  It feels a lot more natural than my last, admittely brief,
encounter.  There are some pretty handy keyboard shortcuts and the modes seem
practical enough. There are a couple of shortcuts that hurt my brain and scare
me a little, though, too.  Namely, these are Cmd-K for check mail (empty trash
in Mail.app), and Cmd-Enter to send a message (seems pretty easy to send an
incomplete message).

The big keyboard atrocity, however, is that Cmd-Left and Cmd-Right jump words
exactly like Opt-Arrows.  Home and End go to the beginning and end of the line,
so it feels 95% Mac except during the rare task of writing an email.  I'm
really hoping for a patch for some configuration options.

There are three other annoyances that will probably stop me from running it
during the day, though.  First, when you have 10 folders in an IMAP server and
it checks them all every minute, and goes _bonk, bonk, bonk, bonk_ for every
one without new messages, it gets a bit old.  Second, when there is new mail in
any folder, the new mail sound plays, the dock/switcher icon updates to show an
unnumbered envelope, and I haven't found a way to know which folder it landed
in.  Third, you can't specify any other sounds based on rules; so my subtle
audio coding based on probable importance doesn't apply.

Word 2008 is a huge improvement at first pass.  I could never get comfortable
in 2004, and 2008 seems a bit more responsive, which makes sense, given that
it's a Universal app.  It still has the obnoxious behavior of opening and
closing the inspector panels because it knows better than I do what I want on
the screen, but I guess the long-term Mac-Word users would balk at anything
else.  Track changes frustrates me the same as always.  I don't really care
about the missing VBA stuff.  The big thing is that it just feels more native
now.

I really do wish it had the ribbon, though.  I've only thought "wow, that's
refreshing" about a handful of things in the past 5 years -- the ribbon was one
of them. I know it seems like a love-it/hate-it thing for now, but I think they
did a really nice job on representing categories of intent (with relevant
actions), and that we'll see ribbon-style stuff replacing the "pile of icons"
toolbar mess that is today's UI world. Just look at Photoshop or any of the Mac
apps with icon-paged inspectors for some UX cousins.

I've only just launched Excel -- I haven't tried to accomplish anything in it
yet. It does look significantly more usable and readable, though. I hard a very
hard time handling Excel 2004; probably the most difficult was the keyboard
handling. I just couldn't wrap my head around Ctrl-U for "Edit Cell Contents".
The general tiny/choppy font was tough, too. I'm holding out hope this time
around.

If nothing else, I have iWork '08/Mail.app and NeoOffice/Thunderbird to round
out the options. :)

As a last thought, when I started typing this, the light went on as to why
Firefox looked a little different -- and, honestly, a lot better -- in the past
day or two. Georgia is a pretty nice font compared to the stock replacement in
2.0.0.12.  It seems like Verdana and maybe a couple of others got upgrades,
too.  It's _almost_ as clean as Safari now.
